Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartII/Introduction.rst, before:

============
Introduction
============

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

What's FLOW3
============

FLOW3 is a PHP-based application framework. It is especially well-suited for
enterprise-grade applications and explicitly supports Domain-Driven Design, a
powerful software design philosophy. Convention over configuration, Test-Driven
Development, Continuous Integration and an easy-to-read source code are other
important principles we follow for the development of FLOW3. Needless to say,
FLOW3 provides you with a full-stack MVC framework for building
state-of-the-art web applications. More exciting though are the first class
Dependency Injection support and the Aspect-Oriented Programming capabilities
which can be used without a single line of configuration.

What's in this tutorial?
========================

This tutorial explains all the steps to get you started with your very own
first FLOW3 project.

Please bring your own computer, a reasonable knowledge of PHP and HTML and at
least some initial experience with object-oriented programming. In return
you'll surely get some new insights into modern programming paradigms and how
to produce clean code in no time.

.. note::
	If you're stuck at some point or stumble over some weirdnesses during the
	tutorial, please let us know! We appreciate any feedback in our mailing
	lists, as a ticket in our issue tracker or via private email. [#]

.. tip::
	This tutorial goes best with a Caffè Latte or, if it's afternoon or late night
	already, with a few shots of Espresso ...

------

.. [#] I'll read any feedback you send me to robert@typo3.org but I don't always manage to answer quickly.

Commit message:

[!!!][TASK] Rename FLOW3 to TYPO3 Flow
Adjusts the code, comments, documentation as needed.

A code migration to adjust packages and schema migrations are added as
well.

Change-Id: If4060e56c1c15bab9e02f107409bf89be217848e
Related: #41466
Migration: TYPO3.FLOW3-201209251426
Releases: 1.2

Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartII/Introduction.rst, after:

============
Introduction
============

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

What's TYPO3 Flow
=================

TYPO3 Flow is a PHP-based application framework. It is especially well-suited for
enterprise-grade applications and explicitly supports Domain-Driven Design, a
powerful software design philosophy. Convention over configuration, Test-Driven
Development, Continuous Integration and an easy-to-read source code are other
important principles we follow for the development of TYPO3 Flow. Needless to say,
TYPO3 Flow provides you with a full-stack MVC framework for building
state-of-the-art web applications. More exciting though are the first class
Dependency Injection support and the Aspect-Oriented Programming capabilities
which can be used without a single line of configuration.

What's in this tutorial?
========================

This tutorial explains all the steps to get you started with your very own
first TYPO3 Flow project.

Please bring your own computer, a reasonable knowledge of PHP and HTML and at
least some initial experience with object-oriented programming. In return
you'll surely get some new insights into modern programming paradigms and how
to produce clean code in no time.

.. note::
	If you're stuck at some point or stumble over some weirdnesses during the
	tutorial, please let us know! We appreciate any feedback in our mailing
	lists, as a ticket in our issue tracker or via private email. [#]

.. tip::
	This tutorial goes best with a Caffè Latte or, if it's afternoon or late night
	already, with a few shots of Espresso ...

------

.. [#] I'll read any feedback you send me to robert@typo3.org but I don't always manage to answer quickly.
