Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartII/Modeling.rst, before:

========
Modeling
========

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

Before we kickstart our first application, let's have a quick look in what
FLOW3 differs from other frameworks.

We claim that FLOW3 **lets you concentrate on the essential** and in fact this
is one major design goal we followed in the making of FLOW3. There are many
factors which can distract developers from their principal task to create an
application solving real-world problems. Most of them are infrastructure-
related and reappear in almost every project: security, database, validation,
persistence, logging, visualization and much more. FLOW3 preaches legible code,
well-proven design patterns, true object orientation and provides first class
support for Domain-Driven Design. And it takes care of most of the cross-cutting
concerns, separating them from the business logic of the application. [#]_ [#]_

Domain-Driven Design
====================

Every software aims to solve problems within its subject area – its domain –
for its users. All the product's other functions are just padding which serves
to further this aim. If the domain of your software is the booking of hotel
rooms, the reservation and cancellation of rooms are two of your main tasks.
However, the presentation of booking forms or the logging of security-relevant
occurrences do not belong to the domain ‘hotel room bookings’ and primarily
serve to support the main task.

Most of the time it is easy to check whether a function belongs to a domain:
imagine that you are booking a room from a receptionist. He is capable of
accomplishing the task and will readily meet your request. Now imagine how this
employee would react if you asked him to render a booking form or to cache
requests. These tasks fall outside his domain. Only in the rarest cases this is
the domain of an application ‘software’. Rather most programs offer solutions
for real life processes.

To master the complexity of your application it is therefore essential to
neatly separate areas which concern the domain from the code and which merely
serves the infrastructure. For this you will need a layered architecture – an
approach that has worked for decades. Even if you have not previously divided
code into layers consciously, the mantra ‘model view controller’ should fall
easily from your lips [#]_ . For the model, which is part of this MVC pattern,
is at best a model of part of a domain. As a **domain model** it is separated
from the other applications and resides in its own layer, the **domain layer**.

.. tip::
	Of course there is much more to say about Domain-Driven Design which
	doesn't belong in this tutorial. A good starter is the `section about
	DDD <http://flow3.typo3.org/documentation/guide/parti/conceptsofmodernprogramming>`_
	on the FLOW3 website.

Domain Model
============

Our first FLOW3 application will be a blog system. Not because programming
blogs is particularly fancy but because you will
a) feel instantly at home with the domain and
b) it is comparable with tutorials you might know from other frameworks.

So, what does our model look like? Our blog has a number of posts, written by a
certain author, with a title, publishing date and the actual post content. Each
post can be tagged with an arbitrary number of tags. Finally, visitors of the
blog may comment blog posts.

A first sketch shows which domain models (classes) we will need:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-1.png

	A simple model

Let's add some properties to each of the models:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-2.png

	Domain Model with properties


To be honest, the above model is not the best example of a rich Domain Model,
compared to Active Records which usually contain not only properties but also
methods. [#]_ For simplicity we also defined properties like ``author`` as simple
strings – you'd rather plan in a dedicated ``Author`` object in a real-world model.

Repositories
============

Now that you have the models (conceptually) in place, you need to think about
how you will access them. One thing you'll do is implementing a getter and
setter method for each property you want to be accessible from the outside.
You'll end up with a lot of methods like ``getTitle``, ``setAuthor``,
``addComment`` and the like [#]_ . Posts (i.e. ``Post`` objects) are stored in
a ``Blog`` object in an array or better in an
``Doctrine/Common/Collections/Collection`` [#]_ instance. For retrieving all posts
from a given Blog all you need to do is calling the ``getPosts`` method of the
Blog in question:

.. code-block:: php

	$posts = $blog->getPosts();

Executing ``getComments`` on the Post would return all related comments:

.. code-block:: php

	$comments = $post->getComments();

In the same manner ``getTags`` returns all tags attached to a given Post. But
how do you retrieve the active Blog object?

All objects which can't be found by another object need to be stored in a
repository. In FLOW3 each repository is responsible for exactly one kind of an
object (i.e. one class). Let's look at the relation between the ``BlogRepository``
and the ``Blog``:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-3.png

	Blog Repository and Blog


As you see, the ``BlogRepository`` provides methods for adding, removing and
finding blogs. In our example application only one blog at a time is supported
so all we need is a function to find the **active** blog – even though the
repository can contain more than one blog.

Now, what if you want to display a list of the 5 latest posts, no matter what
blog they belong to? One option would be to find all blogs, iterate over their
posts and inspect each ``date`` property to create a list of the 5 most recent
posts. Sounds slow? It is.

A much better way to find objects by a given criteria is querying a competent
repository. Therefore, if you want to display a list of the 5 latest posts, you
better create a dedicated ``PostRepository`` which provides a specialized
``findRecentByBlog`` method:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-4.png

	A dedicated Post Repository

I silently added the ``findPrevious`` and ``findNext`` methods because you will
later need them for navigating between posts.

Aggregates
==========

With the Post Repository you're now able to find posts independently from the
Blog. There's no strict rule for when a model requires its own repository. If
you want to display comments independently from their posts and blogs, you'd
surely need a Comment Repository, too. In this sample application you can do
without it and find the comments you need by calling a getter method on
the Post.

All objects which can only be found through a foreign repository, form an
Aggregate. The object having its own repository (in this case ``Post``) becomes
the **Aggregate Root**:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-5.png

	The Post Aggregate

The concept of aggregates simplifies the overall model because all objects of
an aggregate can be seen as a whole: on deleting a post, the framework also
deletes all associated comments and tags because it knows that no direct
references from outside the *aggregate boundary* may exist.

Something to keep in mind is the opposite behavior the framework applies, when
a repository for an object exists: any changes to it must be registered with that
repository, as any persistence cascading of changes stops at aggregate boundaries.

Enough for the modeling part. You'll surely want some more classes later but
first let's get our hands dirty and start with the actual implementation!

-----

.. [#] 	http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-driven_design
.. [#] 	Note that we don't use these techniques for academic reasons.
		Personally I have never attended a lecture about software design – I
		just love clean code due to the advantages I discovered in my real-
		world projects.
.. [#]	If it doesn't, we recommend reading our introductory sections about MVC
		in the :doc:`FLOW3 reference <../PartIII/ModelViewController>`.
.. [#]	see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_record_pattern
.. [#]	Of course we considered magic getters and setters. But then, how do you
		restrict read or write access to single properties?
		Furthermore, magic methods are notably slower and you loose the benefit
		of your IDE's autocompletion feature. Fortunately IDEs like Netbeans or
		Zend Studio provide functions to create getters and
		setters automatically.
.. [#]	see http://www.doctrine-project.org/api/common/2.0/doctrine/common/collections/collection.html

Commit message:

[!!!][TASK] Rename FLOW3 to TYPO3 Flow
Adjusts the code, comments, documentation as needed.

A code migration to adjust packages and schema migrations are added as
well.

Change-Id: If4060e56c1c15bab9e02f107409bf89be217848e
Related: #41466
Migration: TYPO3.FLOW3-201209251426
Releases: 1.2

Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartII/Modeling.rst, after:

========
Modeling
========

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

Before we kickstart our first application, let's have a quick look in what
TYPO3 Flow differs from other frameworks.

We claim that TYPO3 Flow **lets you concentrate on the essential** and in fact this
is one major design goal we followed in the making of TYPO3 Flow. There are many
factors which can distract developers from their principal task to create an
application solving real-world problems. Most of them are infrastructure-
related and reappear in almost every project: security, database, validation,
persistence, logging, visualization and much more. TYPO3 Flow preaches legible code,
well-proven design patterns, true object orientation and provides first class
support for Domain-Driven Design. And it takes care of most of the cross-cutting
concerns, separating them from the business logic of the application. [#]_ [#]_

Domain-Driven Design
====================

Every software aims to solve problems within its subject area – its domain –
for its users. All the product's other functions are just padding which serves
to further this aim. If the domain of your software is the booking of hotel
rooms, the reservation and cancellation of rooms are two of your main tasks.
However, the presentation of booking forms or the logging of security-relevant
occurrences do not belong to the domain ‘hotel room bookings’ and primarily
serve to support the main task.

Most of the time it is easy to check whether a function belongs to a domain:
imagine that you are booking a room from a receptionist. He is capable of
accomplishing the task and will readily meet your request. Now imagine how this
employee would react if you asked him to render a booking form or to cache
requests. These tasks fall outside his domain. Only in the rarest cases this is
the domain of an application ‘software’. Rather most programs offer solutions
for real life processes.

To master the complexity of your application it is therefore essential to
neatly separate areas which concern the domain from the code and which merely
serves the infrastructure. For this you will need a layered architecture – an
approach that has worked for decades. Even if you have not previously divided
code into layers consciously, the mantra ‘model view controller’ should fall
easily from your lips [#]_ . For the model, which is part of this MVC pattern,
is at best a model of part of a domain. As a **domain model** it is separated
from the other applications and resides in its own layer, the **domain layer**.

.. tip::
	Of course there is much more to say about Domain-Driven Design which
	doesn't belong in this tutorial. A good starter is the `section about
	DDD <http://flow.typo3.org/documentation/guide/parti/conceptsofmodernprogramming>`_
	on the TYPO3 Flow website.

Domain Model
============

Our first TYPO3 Flow application will be a blog system. Not because programming
blogs is particularly fancy but because you will
a) feel instantly at home with the domain and
b) it is comparable with tutorials you might know from other frameworks.

So, what does our model look like? Our blog has a number of posts, written by a
certain author, with a title, publishing date and the actual post content. Each
post can be tagged with an arbitrary number of tags. Finally, visitors of the
blog may comment blog posts.

A first sketch shows which domain models (classes) we will need:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-1.png

	A simple model

Let's add some properties to each of the models:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-2.png

	Domain Model with properties


To be honest, the above model is not the best example of a rich Domain Model,
compared to Active Records which usually contain not only properties but also
methods. [#]_ For simplicity we also defined properties like ``author`` as simple
strings – you'd rather plan in a dedicated ``Author`` object in a real-world model.

Repositories
============

Now that you have the models (conceptually) in place, you need to think about
how you will access them. One thing you'll do is implementing a getter and
setter method for each property you want to be accessible from the outside.
You'll end up with a lot of methods like ``getTitle``, ``setAuthor``,
``addComment`` and the like [#]_ . Posts (i.e. ``Post`` objects) are stored in
a ``Blog`` object in an array or better in an
``Doctrine/Common/Collections/Collection`` [#]_ instance. For retrieving all posts
from a given Blog all you need to do is calling the ``getPosts`` method of the
Blog in question:

.. code-block:: php

	$posts = $blog->getPosts();

Executing ``getComments`` on the Post would return all related comments:

.. code-block:: php

	$comments = $post->getComments();

In the same manner ``getTags`` returns all tags attached to a given Post. But
how do you retrieve the active Blog object?

All objects which can't be found by another object need to be stored in a
repository. In TYPO3 Flow each repository is responsible for exactly one kind of an
object (i.e. one class). Let's look at the relation between the ``BlogRepository``
and the ``Blog``:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-3.png

	Blog Repository and Blog


As you see, the ``BlogRepository`` provides methods for adding, removing and
finding blogs. In our example application only one blog at a time is supported
so all we need is a function to find the **active** blog – even though the
repository can contain more than one blog.

Now, what if you want to display a list of the 5 latest posts, no matter what
blog they belong to? One option would be to find all blogs, iterate over their
posts and inspect each ``date`` property to create a list of the 5 most recent
posts. Sounds slow? It is.

A much better way to find objects by a given criteria is querying a competent
repository. Therefore, if you want to display a list of the 5 latest posts, you
better create a dedicated ``PostRepository`` which provides a specialized
``findRecentByBlog`` method:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-4.png

	A dedicated Post Repository

I silently added the ``findPrevious`` and ``findNext`` methods because you will
later need them for navigating between posts.

Aggregates
==========

With the Post Repository you're now able to find posts independently from the
Blog. There's no strict rule for when a model requires its own repository. If
you want to display comments independently from their posts and blogs, you'd
surely need a Comment Repository, too. In this sample application you can do
without it and find the comments you need by calling a getter method on
the Post.

All objects which can only be found through a foreign repository, form an
Aggregate. The object having its own repository (in this case ``Post``) becomes
the **Aggregate Root**:

.. figure:: /Images/GettingStarted/DomainModel-5.png

	The Post Aggregate

The concept of aggregates simplifies the overall model because all objects of
an aggregate can be seen as a whole: on deleting a post, the framework also
deletes all associated comments and tags because it knows that no direct
references from outside the *aggregate boundary* may exist.

Something to keep in mind is the opposite behavior the framework applies, when
a repository for an object exists: any changes to it must be registered with that
repository, as any persistence cascading of changes stops at aggregate boundaries.

Enough for the modeling part. You'll surely want some more classes later but
first let's get our hands dirty and start with the actual implementation!

-----

.. [#] 	http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-driven_design
.. [#] 	Note that we don't use these techniques for academic reasons.
		Personally I have never attended a lecture about software design – I
		just love clean code due to the advantages I discovered in my real-
		world projects.
.. [#]	If it doesn't, we recommend reading our introductory sections about MVC
		in the :doc:`TYPO3 Flow reference <../PartIII/ModelViewController>`.
.. [#]	see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_record_pattern
.. [#]	Of course we considered magic getters and setters. But then, how do you
		restrict read or write access to single properties?
		Furthermore, magic methods are notably slower and you loose the benefit
		of your IDE's autocompletion feature. Fortunately IDEs like Netbeans or
		Zend Studio provide functions to create getters and
		setters automatically.
.. [#]	see http://www.doctrine-project.org/api/common/2.0/doctrine/common/collections/collection.html
