Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartII/Requirements.rst, before:

============
Requirements
============

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

FLOW3 is being developed and tested on multiple platforms and pretty easy to set
up. Nevertheless we recommend that you go through the following list before installing
FLOW3, because a server with exotic *php.ini* settings or wrong file permissions can
easily spoil your day.

Server Environment
==================

Not surprisingly, you'll need a web server for running your FLOW3-based web
application. We recommend Apache (though IIS and others work too – we just
haven't really tested them). Please make sure that the
`mod_rewrite <http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/mod/mod_rewrite.html>`_ module is
enabled.

.. tip::

	To enable FLOW3 to create symlinks on Windows Server 2008 and higher you need
	to do some extra configuration. In IIS you need to configure `Authentication` for
	your site configuration to use a specific user in the `Anonymous Authentication`
	setting. The configured user should also be allowed to create symlinks using the
	local security policy `Local Policies > User Rights Assignments > Create symbolic links`

FLOW3's persistence mechanism requires a `database supported by Doctrine DBAL
<http://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/dbal>`_.

PHP
===

FLOW3 was one of the first PHP projects taking advantage of namespaces and
other features introduced in PHP version 5.3. So, make sure you have PHP 5.3.2 or later
available on your web server. Make sure your PHP CLI binary is the same version!

The default settings and extensions of the PHP distribution should work fine
with FLOW3 but it doesn't hurt checking if the PHP modules ``mbstring``, ``tokenizer``
and ``pdo_mysql`` are enabled, especially if you compiled PHP yourself.
You should (not only because of FLOW3) turn off magic quotes in your *php.ini*
(``magic_quotes_gpc = off``).

.. note::

  Make sure the PHP functions ``system()``, ``shell_exec()``,
  ``escapeshellcmd()`` and ``escapeshellarg()`` are not disabled in you PHP
  installation. They are required for the system to run.

The development context might need more than the default amount of memory.
At least during development you should raise the memory limit to about 250 MB
in your *php.ini* file.

In case you get a fatal error message saying something like ``Maximum function nesting
level of '100' reached, aborting!``, check your *php.ini* file for settings regarding
Xdebug and modify/add a line ``xdebug.max_nesting_level = 500`` (suggested value).

Commit message:

[!!!][TASK] Rename FLOW3 to TYPO3 Flow
Adjusts the code, comments, documentation as needed.

A code migration to adjust packages and schema migrations are added as
well.

Change-Id: If4060e56c1c15bab9e02f107409bf89be217848e
Related: #41466
Migration: TYPO3.FLOW3-201209251426
Releases: 1.2

Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartII/Requirements.rst, after:

============
Requirements
============

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

TYPO3 Flow is being developed and tested on multiple platforms and pretty easy to set
up. Nevertheless we recommend that you go through the following list before installing
TYPO3 Flow, because a server with exotic *php.ini* settings or wrong file permissions can
easily spoil your day.

Server Environment
==================

Not surprisingly, you'll need a web server for running your TYPO3 Flow-based web
application. We recommend Apache (though IIS and others work too – we just
haven't really tested them). Please make sure that the
`mod_rewrite <http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/mod/mod_rewrite.html>`_ module is
enabled.

.. tip::

	To enable TYPO3 Flow to create symlinks on Windows Server 2008 and higher you need
	to do some extra configuration. In IIS you need to configure `Authentication` for
	your site configuration to use a specific user in the `Anonymous Authentication`
	setting. The configured user should also be allowed to create symlinks using the
	local security policy `Local Policies > User Rights Assignments > Create symbolic links`

TYPO3 Flow's persistence mechanism requires a `database supported by Doctrine DBAL
<http://www.doctrine-project.org/projects/dbal>`_.

PHP
===

TYPO3 Flow was one of the first PHP projects taking advantage of namespaces and
other features introduced in PHP version 5.3. So, make sure you have PHP 5.3.2 or later
available on your web server. Make sure your PHP CLI binary is the same version!

The default settings and extensions of the PHP distribution should work fine
with TYPO3 Flow but it doesn't hurt checking if the PHP modules ``mbstring``, ``tokenizer``
and ``pdo_mysql`` are enabled, especially if you compiled PHP yourself.
You should (not only because of TYPO3 Flow) turn off magic quotes in your *php.ini*
(``magic_quotes_gpc = off``).

.. note::

  Make sure the PHP functions ``system()``, ``shell_exec()``,
  ``escapeshellcmd()`` and ``escapeshellarg()`` are not disabled in you PHP
  installation. They are required for the system to run.

The development context might need more than the default amount of memory.
At least during development you should raise the memory limit to about 250 MB
in your *php.ini* file.

In case you get a fatal error message saying something like ``Maximum function nesting
level of '100' reached, aborting!``, check your *php.ini* file for settings regarding
Xdebug and modify/add a line ``xdebug.max_nesting_level = 500`` (suggested value).
