Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartII/Summary.rst, before:

=======
Summary
=======

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

Next Steps
==========

This is the end of the Getting Started Tutorial. You now have a first 
impression of what a FLOW3 application looks like and how the most important
modules of FLOW3 work together.

You now have two options for delving further into FLOW3 programming:

-	Start completing the missing functionality on your own and while you
	do, read further parts of the FLOW3 reference manual
-	Install the finished blog example and explore its code by reading and
	modifying it

If you can't wait to see the finished blog all you need to do is:

-	Delete your blog package (that is *Packages/Application/TYPO3.Blog/*) and then
-	Clone the Blog package from git://git.typo3.org/FLOW3/Packages/TYPO3.Blog.git

Feedback
========

The FLOW3 core team and I are curious about getting your feedback! If you have any
questions, are stuck at some point or just want to let me know how you liked the tutorial
please write to the
`FLOW3 mailing list <http://flow3.typo3.org/support>`_ or drop me a line via robert@typo3.org.

And if you love FLOW3 like we do, spread the word in your blog or through your
favorite social network ...

Commit message:

[!!!][TASK] Rename FLOW3 to TYPO3 Flow
Adjusts the code, comments, documentation as needed.

A code migration to adjust packages and schema migrations are added as
well.

Change-Id: If4060e56c1c15bab9e02f107409bf89be217848e
Related: #41466
Migration: TYPO3.FLOW3-201209251426
Releases: 1.2

Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartII/Summary.rst, after:

=======
Summary
=======

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

Next Steps
==========

This is the end of the Getting Started Tutorial. You now have a first
impression of what a TYPO3 Flow application looks like and how the most important
modules of TYPO3 Flow work together.

You now have two options for delving further into TYPO3 Flow programming:

-	Start completing the missing functionality on your own and while you
	do, read further parts of the TYPO3 Flow reference manual
-	Install the finished blog example and explore its code by reading and
	modifying it

If you can't wait to see the finished blog all you need to do is:

-	Delete your blog package (that is *Packages/Application/TYPO3.Blog/*) and then
-	Clone the Blog package from git://git.typo3.org/Flow/Packages/TYPO3.Blog.git

Feedback
========

The TYPO3 Flow core team and I are curious about getting your feedback! If you have any
questions, are stuck at some point or just want to let me know how you liked the tutorial
please write to the
`TYPO3 Flow mailing list <http://flow.typo3.org/support>`_ or drop me a line via robert@typo3.org.

And if you love TYPO3 Flow like we do, spread the word in your blog or through your
favorite social network ...
