Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartIII/Configuration.rst, before:

﻿=============
Configuration
=============

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

Configuration is an important aspect of versatile applications. TYPO3 Flow provides you with
configuration mechanisms which have a small footprint and are convenient to use and
powerful at the same time. Hub for all configuration is the configuration manager which
handles alls configuration tasks like reading configuration, configuration cascading, and
(later) also writing configuration.

File Locations
==============

There are several locations where configuration files may be placed. All of them are
scanned by the configuration manager during initialization and cascaded into a single
configuration tree. The following locations exist (listed in the order they are loaded,
i.e. later values override prior ones):

``/Packages/<PackageDirectoryAndName>/Configuration/``
  The *Configuration* directory of each package is scanned first. Only at this stage new
  configuration options must be introduced (by defining a default value).

``/Configuration/``
  Configuration in the global *Configuration* directory overrides the default settings
  defined in the package's configuration directories.

``/Packages/<PackageDirectoryAndName>/Configuration/<ApplicationContext>/``
  There may exist a subdirectory for each application context (see TYPO3 Flow Bootstrap
  section). This configuration is only loaded if TYPO3 Flow runs in the respective
  application context.

``/Configuration/<ApplicationContext>/``
  The context specific configuration again overrides the generic settings.

The configuration manager also considers custom contexts, such as ``Production/Live``.
First, the base configuration is loaded, followed by the context specific configuration
for ``Production`` and ``Production/Live``.

Configuration Files
===================

TYPO3 Flow distinguishes between different types of configuration. The most important type of
configuration are the settings, however other configuration types exist for special
purposes.

The configuration format is YAML and the configuration options of each type are
defined in their own dedicated file:

``Settings.yaml``
  Contains user-level settings, i.e. configuration options the users or administrators
  are meant to change. Settings are the highest level of system configuration.

``Routes.yaml``
  Contains routes configuration. This routing information is parsed and used by the MVC
  Web Routing mechanism. Refer to the :ref:`ch-routing` chapter for more information.

``Objects.yaml``
  Contains object configuration, i.e. options which configure objects and the
  combination of those on a lower level. See the :ref:`ch-object-management` chapter for more
  information.

``Policy.yaml``
  Contains the configuration of the security policies of the system. See the :ref:`ch-security`
  chapter for details.

``PackageStates.php``
  Contains a list of packages and their current state, for  example if they are active
  or not. Don't edit this file directly, rather use the *flow* command line tool do
  activate and deactivate packages.

``Caches.yaml``
  Contains a list of caches which are registered automatically. Caches defined in this
  configuration file are registered in an early stage of the boot process and profit
  from mechanisms such as automatic flushing by the File Monitor. See the chapter about
  the :ref:`ch-caching` for details.

Defining Configuration
======================

Configuration Format
--------------------

The format of TYPO3 Flow's configuration files is YAML. YAML is a well-readable format which is
especially well-suited for defining configuration. The full specification among with many
examples can be found on the `YAML website <http://www.yaml.org/>`_. All important parts of the YAML
specification are supported by the parser used by TYPO3 Flow, it might happen though that some
exotic features won't have the desired effect. At best you look at the configuration files
which come with the TYPO3 Flow distribution for getting more examples.

**Example: a package-level Settings.yaml**

.. code-block:: yaml

	#                                                                        #
	# Settings Configuration for the TYPO3.Viewhelpertest Package            #
	#                                                                        #

	TYPO3:
	  Viewhelpertest:
	    includeViewHelpers: [alias, base]

	    xhprof:
	      rootDirectory: '' # path to the XHProf library
	      outputDirectory: %FLOW_PATH_DATA%Temporary/Viewhelpertest/XHProf/ # output directory

	    profilingTemplatesDirectory: %FLOW_PATH_DATA%Temporary/Viewhelpertest/Fluidtemplates/


.. warning::

  Always use *two spaces* for indentation in YAML files. The parser will not
  accept indentation using tabs.

Constants
---------

Sometimes it is necessary to use values in your configuration files which are defined as
PHP constants. These values can be included by special markers which are replaced by the
actual value during parse time. The format is ``%<CONSTANT_NAME>%`` where
``<CONSTANT_NAME>`` is the name of a constant. Note that the constant name must be all
uppercase.

Some examples:

``%FLOW_PATH_WEB%``
  Will be replaced by the path to the public web directory.

``%FLOW_PATH_DATA%``
  Will be replaced by the path to the */Data/* directory.

``%PHP_VERSION%``
  Will be replaced by the current PHP version.

``%TYPO3\Flow\Core\Bootstrap::MINIMUM_PHP_VERSION%``
  Will be replaced by this class constant's value. Note that
  a leading namespace backslash is generally allowed as of PHP,
  but is not recommended due to CGL (stringed class names should not
  have a leading backslash).

Custom Configuration Types
--------------------------

Custom configuration types allow to extract parts of the system configuration into
separate files.

The following will register a new type ``Views`` for configuration, using the default
configuration processing handler. The code needs to be in your ``Package``s ``boot()``
method.

**Example: Register a custom configuration type**

.. code-block:: php

	$dispatcher = $bootstrap->getSignalSlotDispatcher();
	$dispatcher->connect('TYPO3\Flow\Configuration\ConfigurationManager', 'configurationManagerReady',
		function ($configurationManager) {
			$configurationManager->registerConfigurationType('Views');
		}
	);

This will allow to use the new configuration type ``Views`` in the same way as the other types
supported by Flow natively, as soon as you have a file named ``Views.yaml`` in your configuration
folder(s). See `Working with other configuration`_ for details.

If you want to use a specific configuration processing type, you can pass it when registering
the configuration. The supported types are defined as ``CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_*``
constants in ``ConfigurationManager``.

**Example: Register a custom configuration type**

.. code-block:: php

	$dispatcher = $bootstrap->getSignalSlotDispatcher();
	$dispatcher->connect('TYPO3\Flow\Configuration\ConfigurationManager', 'configurationManagerReady',
		function ($configurationManager) {
			$configurationManager->registerConfigurationType(
				'CustomObjects',
				ConfigurationManager::CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_OBJECTS
			);
		}
	);

Split configuration sources
---------------------------

For custom types it is possible to allow for *split* configuration sources. For the YAML
source used in Flow it allows to use the configuration type as a prefix for the
configuration filenames.

**Example: Register a custom configuration type, split-source**

.. code-block:: php

	$dispatcher = $bootstrap->getSignalSlotDispatcher();
	$dispatcher->connect('TYPO3\Flow\Configuration\ConfigurationManager', 'configurationManagerReady',
		function ($configurationManager) {
			$configurationManager->registerConfigurationType(
				'Models',
				ConfigurationManager::CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_DEFAULT,
				TRUE
			);
		}
	);

The above code will lead to the following files being read, sorted by name and merged if the
configuration of type ``Models`` is requested:

.. code-block:: text

	Configuration/
		Models.Foo.yaml
		Models.Bar.yaml
		Models.Quux.yaml

.. note::
	Split configuration is only supported for the ``CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_DEFAULT`` and
	``CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_SETTINGS`` processing types.

Accessing Settings
==================

In almost all cases, TYPO3 Flow will automatically provide you with the right configuration.

What you usually want to work with are ``settings``, which are application-specific to
your package. The following example demonstrates how to let TYPO3 Flow inject the settings
of a classes' package and output some option value:

**Example: Settings Injection**

.. code-block:: yaml

	Acme:
	  Demo:
	    administrator:
	      email: 'john@doe.com'
	      name: 'John Doe'

.. code-block:: php

	namespace Acme\Demo;

	class SomeClass {

		/**
		 * @var array
		 */
		protected $settings;

		/**
		 * Inject the settings
		 *
		 * @param array $settings
		 * @return void
		 */
		public function injectSettings(array $settings) {
			$this->settings = $settings;
		}

		/**
		 * Outputs some settings of the "Demo" package.
		 *
		 * @return void
		 */
		public function theMethod() {
			echo ($this->settings['administrator']['name']);
			echo ($this->settings['administrator']['email']);
		}
	}

Working with other configuration
--------------------------------

Although infrequently necessary, it is also possible to retrieve options of the more
special configuration types. The ``ConfigurationManager`` provides a method called
``getConfiguration()`` for this purpose. The result this method returns depends on the
actual configuration type you are requesting.

Bottom line is that you should be highly aware of what you're doing when working with
these special options and that they might change in a later version of TYPO3 Flow. Usually
there are much better ways to get the desired information (e.g. ask the Object Manager for
object configuration).

Configuration Cache
===================

Parsing the YAML configuration files takes a bit of time which remarkably slows down the
initialization of TYPO3 Flow. That's why all configuration is cached by default when TYPO3 Flow is
running in Production context. Because this cache cannot be cleared automatically it is
important to know that changes to any configuration file won't have any effect until you
manually flush the respective caches.

This feature can be configured through a switch in the *Settings.yaml* file:

.. code-block:: yaml

	TYPO3:
	  Flow:
	    configuration:
	      compileConfigurationFiles: TRUE

When enabled, the configuration manager will compile all loaded configuration into a PHP
file which will be loaded in subsequent calls instead of parsing the YAML files again.

.. important::

	Once the configuration is cached changes to the YAML files don't have any effect.
	Therefore in order to switch off the configuration cache again you need to disable the
	feature in the YAML file *and* flush all caches afterwards manually.

In order to flush caches, use the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

	$ ./flow flow:cache:flush

Configuration Validation
========================

Errors in configuration can lead to hard to spot errors and seemingly random
weird behavior. TYPO3 Flow therefore comes with a general purpose array validator
which can check PHP arrays for validity according to some schema.

This validator is used in the ``configuration:validate`` command::

  $ ./flow configuration:validate --type Settings
  Validating configuration for type: "Settings"

  16 schema files were found:
   - package:"TYPO3.Flow" schema:"Settings/TYPO3.Flow.aop" -> is valid
  …
   - package:"TYPO3.Flow" schema:"Settings/TYPO3.Flow.utility" -> is valid

  The configuration is valid!

See the command help for details on how to use the validation.

Writing Schemata
----------------

.. warning::

 While the `configuration:validate` command will stay like it is, the inner workings
 of the schema validation are still subject to change. The location of schema files
 and the syntax might be adjusted in the future, as we (and you) gather real-world
 experience with this.

 With that out of the way: feel free to create custom schemata and let us know
 of any issues you find or suggestion you have!

The schema format is adapted from the `JSON Schema standard <http://json-schema.org>`_;
currently the Parts 5.1 to 5.25 of the json-schema specification are implemented,
with the following deviations from the specification:

* The "type" constraint is required for all properties.
* The validator only executes the checks that make sense for a specific type,
  see list of possible contstraints below.
* The "format" constraint for string type has additional class-name and
  instance-name options.
* The "dependencies" constraint of the spec is not implemented.
* Similar to "patternProperties" "formatProperties" can be specified specified
  for dictionaries

The schemas are searched in the path *Resources/Private/Schema* of all active
Packages. The schema-filenames must match the pattern
``<type>.<path>.schema.yaml``. The type and/or the path can also be expressed
as subdirectories of *Resources/Private/Schema*. So
*Settings/TYPO3/Flow.persistence.schema.yaml* will match the same paths as
*Settings.TYPO3.Flow.persistence.schema.yaml* or
*Settings/TYPO3.Flow/persistence.schema.yaml*.

Here is an example of a schema, from *TYPO3.Flow.core.schema.yaml*:

.. code-block:: yaml

 type: dictionary
 additionalProperties: FALSE
 properties:
   'context': { type: string, required: TRUE }
   'phpBinaryPathAndFilename': { type: string, required: TRUE }

It declares the constraints for the *TYPO3.Flow.core* setting:

* the setting is a dictionary (an associative array in PHP nomenclature)
* properties not defined in the schema are not not allowed
* the properties ``context`` and ``phpBinaryPathAndFilename`` are both required
  and of type string

General constraints for all types (for implementation see ``validate`` method in
``SchemaValidator``):

* type
* disallow
* enum

Additional constraints allowed per type:

:string: pattern, minLength, maxLength, format(date-time|date|time|uri|email|ipv4|ipv6|ip-address|host-name|class-name|interface-name)
:number: maximum, minimum, exclusiveMinimum, exclusiveMaximum, divisibleBy
:integer: maximum, minimum, exclusiveMinimum, exclusiveMaximum, divisibleBy
:boolean: --
:array: minItems, maxItems, items
:dictionary: properties, patternProperties, formatProperties, additionalProperties
:null: --
:any: --

Commit message:

[FEATURE] Allow view configuration via Views.yaml
This patch adds a new Configuration called ``Views.yaml``
to set/override various settings for Views, just
like the template path to use or controller options.

Example ``Views.yaml``::

	-
	  requestFilter: 'isPackage("My.Package")'
	  viewClassName: 'TYPO3\TypoScript\View\TypoScriptView'
	  options:
	    typoScriptPathPattern: 'resource://My.Package/Private/TypoScripts'

Change I7596f6fc7f8349f3c43d05e6b5916b7946d412d5 in
Fluid takes care about this with rearranging the TemplateView.

Additionally this change introduces a dependency to TYPO3.Eel.

Change-Id: I93acc3ed3d9578a5d00d494b367aa7201138255b
Resolves: #42176
Releases: master

Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartIII/Configuration.rst, after:

﻿=============
Configuration
=============

.. sectionauthor:: Robert Lemke <robert@typo3.org>

Configuration is an important aspect of versatile applications. TYPO3 Flow provides you with
configuration mechanisms which have a small footprint and are convenient to use and
powerful at the same time. Hub for all configuration is the configuration manager which
handles alls configuration tasks like reading configuration, configuration cascading, and
(later) also writing configuration.

File Locations
==============

There are several locations where configuration files may be placed. All of them are
scanned by the configuration manager during initialization and cascaded into a single
configuration tree. The following locations exist (listed in the order they are loaded,
i.e. later values override prior ones):

``/Packages/<PackageDirectoryAndName>/Configuration/``
  The *Configuration* directory of each package is scanned first. Only at this stage new
  configuration options must be introduced (by defining a default value).

``/Configuration/``
  Configuration in the global *Configuration* directory overrides the default settings
  defined in the package's configuration directories.

``/Packages/<PackageDirectoryAndName>/Configuration/<ApplicationContext>/``
  There may exist a subdirectory for each application context (see TYPO3 Flow Bootstrap
  section). This configuration is only loaded if TYPO3 Flow runs in the respective
  application context.

``/Configuration/<ApplicationContext>/``
  The context specific configuration again overrides the generic settings.

The configuration manager also considers custom contexts, such as ``Production/Live``.
First, the base configuration is loaded, followed by the context specific configuration
for ``Production`` and ``Production/Live``.

Configuration Files
===================

TYPO3 Flow distinguishes between different types of configuration. The most important type of
configuration are the settings, however other configuration types exist for special
purposes.

The configuration format is YAML and the configuration options of each type are
defined in their own dedicated file:

``Settings.yaml``
  Contains user-level settings, i.e. configuration options the users or administrators
  are meant to change. Settings are the highest level of system configuration.

``Routes.yaml``
  Contains routes configuration. This routing information is parsed and used by the MVC
  Web Routing mechanism. Refer to the :ref:`ch-routing` chapter for more information.

``Objects.yaml``
  Contains object configuration, i.e. options which configure objects and the
  combination of those on a lower level. See the :ref:`ch-object-management` chapter for more
  information.

``Policy.yaml``
  Contains the configuration of the security policies of the system. See the :ref:`ch-security`
  chapter for details.

``PackageStates.php``
  Contains a list of packages and their current state, for  example if they are active
  or not. Don't edit this file directly, rather use the *flow* command line tool do
  activate and deactivate packages.

``Caches.yaml``
  Contains a list of caches which are registered automatically. Caches defined in this
  configuration file are registered in an early stage of the boot process and profit
  from mechanisms such as automatic flushing by the File Monitor. See the chapter about
  the :ref:`ch-caching` for details.

``Views.yaml``
  Contains configurations for Views, for example the lookup paths for templates.
  See the :ref:`_ch-model-view-controller` chapter for details.

Defining Configuration
======================

Configuration Format
--------------------

The format of TYPO3 Flow's configuration files is YAML. YAML is a well-readable format which is
especially well-suited for defining configuration. The full specification among with many
examples can be found on the `YAML website <http://www.yaml.org/>`_. All important parts of the YAML
specification are supported by the parser used by TYPO3 Flow, it might happen though that some
exotic features won't have the desired effect. At best you look at the configuration files
which come with the TYPO3 Flow distribution for getting more examples.

**Example: a package-level Settings.yaml**

.. code-block:: yaml

	#                                                                        #
	# Settings Configuration for the TYPO3.Viewhelpertest Package            #
	#                                                                        #

	TYPO3:
	  Viewhelpertest:
	    includeViewHelpers: [alias, base]

	    xhprof:
	      rootDirectory: '' # path to the XHProf library
	      outputDirectory: %FLOW_PATH_DATA%Temporary/Viewhelpertest/XHProf/ # output directory

	    profilingTemplatesDirectory: %FLOW_PATH_DATA%Temporary/Viewhelpertest/Fluidtemplates/


.. warning::

  Always use *two spaces* for indentation in YAML files. The parser will not
  accept indentation using tabs.

Constants
---------

Sometimes it is necessary to use values in your configuration files which are defined as
PHP constants. These values can be included by special markers which are replaced by the
actual value during parse time. The format is ``%<CONSTANT_NAME>%`` where
``<CONSTANT_NAME>`` is the name of a constant. Note that the constant name must be all
uppercase.

Some examples:

``%FLOW_PATH_WEB%``
  Will be replaced by the path to the public web directory.

``%FLOW_PATH_DATA%``
  Will be replaced by the path to the */Data/* directory.

``%PHP_VERSION%``
  Will be replaced by the current PHP version.

``%TYPO3\Flow\Core\Bootstrap::MINIMUM_PHP_VERSION%``
  Will be replaced by this class constant's value. Note that
  a leading namespace backslash is generally allowed as of PHP,
  but is not recommended due to CGL (stringed class names should not
  have a leading backslash).

Custom Configuration Types
--------------------------

Custom configuration types allow to extract parts of the system configuration into
separate files.

The following will register a new type ``Views`` for configuration, using the default
configuration processing handler. The code needs to be in your ``Package``s ``boot()``
method.

**Example: Register a custom configuration type**

.. code-block:: php

	$dispatcher = $bootstrap->getSignalSlotDispatcher();
	$dispatcher->connect('TYPO3\Flow\Configuration\ConfigurationManager', 'configurationManagerReady',
		function ($configurationManager) {
			$configurationManager->registerConfigurationType('Views');
		}
	);

This will allow to use the new configuration type ``Views`` in the same way as the other types
supported by Flow natively, as soon as you have a file named ``Views.yaml`` in your configuration
folder(s). See `Working with other configuration`_ for details.

If you want to use a specific configuration processing type, you can pass it when registering
the configuration. The supported types are defined as ``CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_*``
constants in ``ConfigurationManager``.

**Example: Register a custom configuration type**

.. code-block:: php

	$dispatcher = $bootstrap->getSignalSlotDispatcher();
	$dispatcher->connect('TYPO3\Flow\Configuration\ConfigurationManager', 'configurationManagerReady',
		function ($configurationManager) {
			$configurationManager->registerConfigurationType(
				'CustomObjects',
				ConfigurationManager::CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_OBJECTS
			);
		}
	);

Split configuration sources
---------------------------

For custom types it is possible to allow for *split* configuration sources. For the YAML
source used in Flow it allows to use the configuration type as a prefix for the
configuration filenames.

**Example: Register a custom configuration type, split-source**

.. code-block:: php

	$dispatcher = $bootstrap->getSignalSlotDispatcher();
	$dispatcher->connect('TYPO3\Flow\Configuration\ConfigurationManager', 'configurationManagerReady',
		function ($configurationManager) {
			$configurationManager->registerConfigurationType(
				'Models',
				ConfigurationManager::CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_DEFAULT,
				TRUE
			);
		}
	);

The above code will lead to the following files being read, sorted by name and merged if the
configuration of type ``Models`` is requested:

.. code-block:: text

	Configuration/
		Models.Foo.yaml
		Models.Bar.yaml
		Models.Quux.yaml

.. note::
	Split configuration is only supported for the ``CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_DEFAULT`` and
	``CONFIGURATION_PROCESSING_TYPE_SETTINGS`` processing types.

Accessing Settings
==================

In almost all cases, TYPO3 Flow will automatically provide you with the right configuration.

What you usually want to work with are ``settings``, which are application-specific to
your package. The following example demonstrates how to let TYPO3 Flow inject the settings
of a classes' package and output some option value:

**Example: Settings Injection**

.. code-block:: yaml

	Acme:
	  Demo:
	    administrator:
	      email: 'john@doe.com'
	      name: 'John Doe'

.. code-block:: php

	namespace Acme\Demo;

	class SomeClass {

		/**
		 * @var array
		 */
		protected $settings;

		/**
		 * Inject the settings
		 *
		 * @param array $settings
		 * @return void
		 */
		public function injectSettings(array $settings) {
			$this->settings = $settings;
		}

		/**
		 * Outputs some settings of the "Demo" package.
		 *
		 * @return void
		 */
		public function theMethod() {
			echo ($this->settings['administrator']['name']);
			echo ($this->settings['administrator']['email']);
		}
	}

Working with other configuration
--------------------------------

Although infrequently necessary, it is also possible to retrieve options of the more
special configuration types. The ``ConfigurationManager`` provides a method called
``getConfiguration()`` for this purpose. The result this method returns depends on the
actual configuration type you are requesting.

Bottom line is that you should be highly aware of what you're doing when working with
these special options and that they might change in a later version of TYPO3 Flow. Usually
there are much better ways to get the desired information (e.g. ask the Object Manager for
object configuration).

Configuration Cache
===================

Parsing the YAML configuration files takes a bit of time which remarkably slows down the
initialization of TYPO3 Flow. That's why all configuration is cached by default when TYPO3 Flow is
running in Production context. Because this cache cannot be cleared automatically it is
important to know that changes to any configuration file won't have any effect until you
manually flush the respective caches.

This feature can be configured through a switch in the *Settings.yaml* file:

.. code-block:: yaml

	TYPO3:
	  Flow:
	    configuration:
	      compileConfigurationFiles: TRUE

When enabled, the configuration manager will compile all loaded configuration into a PHP
file which will be loaded in subsequent calls instead of parsing the YAML files again.

.. important::

	Once the configuration is cached changes to the YAML files don't have any effect.
	Therefore in order to switch off the configuration cache again you need to disable the
	feature in the YAML file *and* flush all caches afterwards manually.

In order to flush caches, use the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

	$ ./flow flow:cache:flush

Configuration Validation
========================

Errors in configuration can lead to hard to spot errors and seemingly random
weird behavior. TYPO3 Flow therefore comes with a general purpose array validator
which can check PHP arrays for validity according to some schema.

This validator is used in the ``configuration:validate`` command::

  $ ./flow configuration:validate --type Settings
  Validating configuration for type: "Settings"

  16 schema files were found:
   - package:"TYPO3.Flow" schema:"Settings/TYPO3.Flow.aop" -> is valid
  …
   - package:"TYPO3.Flow" schema:"Settings/TYPO3.Flow.utility" -> is valid

  The configuration is valid!

See the command help for details on how to use the validation.

Writing Schemata
----------------

.. warning::

 While the `configuration:validate` command will stay like it is, the inner workings
 of the schema validation are still subject to change. The location of schema files
 and the syntax might be adjusted in the future, as we (and you) gather real-world
 experience with this.

 With that out of the way: feel free to create custom schemata and let us know
 of any issues you find or suggestion you have!

The schema format is adapted from the `JSON Schema standard <http://json-schema.org>`_;
currently the Parts 5.1 to 5.25 of the json-schema specification are implemented,
with the following deviations from the specification:

* The "type" constraint is required for all properties.
* The validator only executes the checks that make sense for a specific type,
  see list of possible contstraints below.
* The "format" constraint for string type has additional class-name and
  instance-name options.
* The "dependencies" constraint of the spec is not implemented.
* Similar to "patternProperties" "formatProperties" can be specified specified
  for dictionaries

The schemas are searched in the path *Resources/Private/Schema* of all active
Packages. The schema-filenames must match the pattern
``<type>.<path>.schema.yaml``. The type and/or the path can also be expressed
as subdirectories of *Resources/Private/Schema*. So
*Settings/TYPO3/Flow.persistence.schema.yaml* will match the same paths as
*Settings.TYPO3.Flow.persistence.schema.yaml* or
*Settings/TYPO3.Flow/persistence.schema.yaml*.

Here is an example of a schema, from *TYPO3.Flow.core.schema.yaml*:

.. code-block:: yaml

 type: dictionary
 additionalProperties: FALSE
 properties:
   'context': { type: string, required: TRUE }
   'phpBinaryPathAndFilename': { type: string, required: TRUE }

It declares the constraints for the *TYPO3.Flow.core* setting:

* the setting is a dictionary (an associative array in PHP nomenclature)
* properties not defined in the schema are not not allowed
* the properties ``context`` and ``phpBinaryPathAndFilename`` are both required
  and of type string

General constraints for all types (for implementation see ``validate`` method in
``SchemaValidator``):

* type
* disallow
* enum

Additional constraints allowed per type:

:string: pattern, minLength, maxLength, format(date-time|date|time|uri|email|ipv4|ipv6|ip-address|host-name|class-name|interface-name)
:number: maximum, minimum, exclusiveMinimum, exclusiveMaximum, divisibleBy
:integer: maximum, minimum, exclusiveMinimum, exclusiveMaximum, divisibleBy
:boolean: --
:array: minItems, maxItems, items
:dictionary: properties, patternProperties, formatProperties, additionalProperties
:null: --
:any: --
