Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartIII/PropertyMapping.rst, before:

================
Property Mapping
================

.. sectionauthor:: Sebastian Kurfürst <sebastian@typo3.org>

.. TODOs: extract TypeConverter reference from PHPDoc

The Property Mappers task is to convert *simple types*, like arrays, strings, numbers,
to objects. This is most prominently needed in the MVC framework: When a request
arrives, it contains all its data as simple types, that is strings, and arrays.

We want to help the developer thinking about *objects*, that's why we try to
transparently convert the incoming data to its correct object representation.
This is the objective of the *Property Mapper*.

At first, we show some examples on how the property mapper can be used, and then
the internal structure is explained.

The main API of the ``PropertyMapper`` is very simple: It just consists of one method
``convert($source, $targetType)``, which receives input data as the first argument,
and the target type as second argument. This method returns the built object of type
``$targetType``.

Example Usage
=============

The most simple usage is to convert simple types to different simple types, i.e.
converting a numeric ``string`` to a ``float`` number::

	// $propertyMapper is of class TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\PropertyMapper
	$result = $propertyMapper->convert('12.5', 'float');
	// $result == (float)12.5

This is of course a really conceived example, as the same result could be achieved
by just casting the numeric string to a floating point number.

Our next example goes a bit further and shows how we can use the Property Mapper
to convert an array of data into a domain model::

	/**
	 * @FLOW3\Entity
	 */
	class TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person {
		/**
		 * @var string
		 */
		protected $name;

		/**
		 * @var \DateTime
		 */
		protected $birthDate;

		/**
		 * @var TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person
		 */
		protected $mother;
		// ... furthermore contains getters and setters for the above properties.
	}

	$inputArray = array(
		'name' => 'John Fisher',
		'birthDate' => '1990-11-14T15:32:12+00:00'
	);
	$person = $propertyMapper->convert($inputArray, 'TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person');

	// $person is a newly created object of type TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person
	// $person->name == 'John Fisher'
	// $person->birthDate is a DateTime object with the correct date set.

We'll first use a simple input array::

	$input = array(
	  'name' => 'John Fisher',
	  'birthDate' => '1990-11-14T15:32:12+00:00'
	);

After calling ``$propertyMapper->convert($input, 'TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person')``,
we receive an ew object of type ``Person`` which has ``$name`` set to ``John Fisher``,
and ``$birthDate`` set to a ``DateTime`` object of the specified date. You might
now wonder how the PropertyMapper knows how to convert ``DateTime`` objects and
``Person`` objects? The answer is: It does not know that. However, the PropertyMapper
calls specialized *Type Converters* which take care of the actual conversion.

In our example, three type converters are called:

* First, to convert 'John Fisher' to a string (required by the annotation in the
  domain model), a ``StringConverter`` is called. This converter simply passes
  through the input string, without modification.
* Then, a ``DateTimeConverter`` is called, whose responsibility is to convert the
  input string into a valid ``DateTime`` object.
* At the end, the ``Person`` object still needs to be built. For that, the
  ``PersistentObjectConverter`` is responsible. It creates a fresh ``Person`` object,
  and sets the ``$name`` and ``$birthDate`` properties which were already built
  using the type converters above.

This example should illustrate that property mapping is a recursive process, and
the PropertyMappers task is exactly to orchestrate the different ``TypeConverters``
needed to build a big, compound object.

The ``PersistentObjectConverter`` has some more features, as it supports fetching
objects from the persistence layer if an identity for the object is given. Both
the following inputs will result in the corresponding object to be fetched from
the persistence layer::

	$input = '14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66';
	// or:
	$input = array(
	  '__identity' => '14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66'
	);

	$person = $propertyMapper->convert($input, 'MyCompany\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person');
	// The $person object with UUID 14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66 is fetched from the persistence layer

In case some more properties are specified in the array (besides ``__identity``),
the submitted properties are modified on the fetched object. These modifications are
not automatically saved to the database at the end of the request, you need to pass
such an instance to ``update`` on the corresponding repository to persist the changes.

So, let's walk through a more complete input example::

	$input = array(
	  '__identity' => '14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66',
	  'name' => 'John Doe',
	  'mother' => 'efd3b461-6f24-499d-97bc-309dfbe01f05'
	);

In this case, the following steps happen:

* The ``Person`` object with identity ``14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66`` is
  fetched from persistence.
* The ``$name`` of the fetched ``$person`` object is updated to ``John Doe``
* As the ``$mother`` property is also of type ``Person``, the ``PersistentObjectConverter``
  is invoked recursively. It fetches the ``Person`` object with identifier
  ``efd3b461-6f24-499d-97bc-309dfbe01f05``, which is then set as the ``$mother``
  property of the original person.

Here, you see that we can also set associations using the Property Mapper.

Configuring the Conversion Process
==================================

It is possible to configure the conversion process by specifying a
``PropertyMappingConfiguration`` as third parameter to ``PropertyMapper::convert()``.
If no ``PropertyMappingConfiguration`` is specified, the ``PropertyMappingConfigurationBuilder``
automatically creates a default ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``.

In most cases, you should use the ``PropertyMappingConfigurationBuilder`` to create a new
PropertyMappingConfiguration, so that you get a convenient default configuration::

		// Here $propertyMappingConfigurationBuilder is an instance of
		// \TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\PropertyMappingConfigurationBuilder
	$propertyMappingConfiguration = $propertyMappingConfigurationBuilder->build();

		// modify $propertyMappingConfiguration here

		// pass the configuration to convert()
	$propertyMapper->convert($source, $targetType, $propertyMappingConfiguration);

The following configuration options exist:

* ``setMapping($sourcePropertyName, $targetPropertyName)`` can be used to rename properties.

  Example: If the input array contains a property ``lastName``, but the accordant
  property in the model is called ``$givenName``, the following configuration performs
  the renaming::

    $propertyMappingConfiguration->setMapping('lastName', 'givenName');

* ``setTypeConverter($typeConverter)`` can be used to directly set a type converter
  which should be used. This disables the automatic resolving of type converters.

* ``setTypeConverterOption($typeConverterClassName, $optionKey, $optionValue)``
  can be used to set type converter specific options.

  Example: The DateTimeConverter supports a configuration option for the expected
  date format::

	$propertyMappingConfiguration->setTypeConverterOption(
		'TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\DateTimeConverter',
		\TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\DateTimeConverter::CONFIGURATION_DATE_FORMAT,
		'Y-m-d'
	);

* ``setTypeConverterOptions($typeConverterClassName, array $options)`` can be used
  to set multiple configuration options for the given ``TypeConverter``. This overrides
  all previously set configuration options for the ``TypeConverter``.

* ``allowProperties($propertyName1, $propertyName2, ...)`` specifies the allowed
  property names which should be converted on the current level.

* ``allowAllProperties()`` allows *all* properties on the current level.

* ``allowAllPropertiesExcept($propertyName1, $propertyName2)`` effectively *inverts*
  the behavior: all properties on the current level are allowed, except the ones
  specified as arguments to this method.

All the configuration options work only for the current level, i.e. all of the
above converter options would only work for the top level type converter. However,
it is also possible to specify configuration options for lower levels, using
``forProperty($propertyPath)``. This is best shown with the example from the previous section.

The following configuration sets a mapping on the top level, and furthermore
configures the ``DateTime`` converter for the ``birthDate`` property::

	$propertyMappingConfiguration->setMapping('fullName', 'name');
	$propertyMappingConfiguration
		->forProperty('birthDate')
		->setTypeConverterOption(
			'TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\DateTimeConverter',
			\TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\DateTimeConverter::CONFIGURATION_DATE_FORMAT,
			'Y-m-d'
		);

``forProperty()`` also supports more than one nesting level using the dot notation,
so writing something like ``forProperty('mother.birthDate')`` is possible.

.. admonition:: Property Mapping Configuration in the MVC stack

	The most common use-case where you will want to adjust the Property Mapping Configuration
	is inside the MVC stack, where incoming arguments are converted to objects.

	If you use Fluid forms, normally no adjustments are needed. However, when programming
	a web service or an ajax endpoint, you might need to set the ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``
	manually. You can access them using the ``\TYPO3\FLOW3\Mvc\Controller\Argument``
	object -- and this configuration takes place inside the corresponding ``initialize*Action``
	of the controller, as in the following example:

	.. code-block:: php

		public function initializeUpdateAction() {
			$commentConfiguration = $this->arguments['comment']->getPropertyMappingConfiguration();
			$commentConfiguration->allowAllProperties();
			$commentConfiguration
				->setTypeConverterOption(
				'TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\PersistentObjectConverter',
				\TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\PersistentObjectConverter::CONFIGURATION_CREATION_ALLOWED,
				TRUE
			);
		}

		/**
		 * @param \My\Package\Domain\Model\Comment $comment
		 */
		public function updateAction(\My\Package\Domain\Model\Comment $comment) {
			// use $comment object here
		}


Security Considerations
-----------------------

The property mapping process can be security-relevant, as a small example should
show: Suppose there is a REST API where a person can create a new account, and assign
a role to this account (from a pre-defined list). This role controls the access
permissions the user has. The data which is sent to the server might look like this::

	array(
	  'username' => 'mynewuser',
	  'role' => '5bc42c89-a418-457f-8095-062ace6d22fd'
	);

Here, the ``username`` field contains the name of the user, and the ``role`` field points
to the role the user has selected. Now, an attacker could modify the data, and submit the
following::

	array(
	  'username' => 'mynewuser',
	  'role' => array(
	    'name' => 'superuser',
	    'admin' => 1
	  )
	);

As the property mapper works recursively, it would create a new ``Role`` object with the
admin flag set to ``TRUE``, which might compromise the security in the system.

That's why two parts need to be configured for enabling the recursive behavior: First, you need
to specify the allowed properties using one of the ``allowProperties(), allowAllProperties()``
or ``allowAllPropertiesExcept()`` methods.

Second, you need to configure the the PersistentObjectConverter using the two options
``CONFIGURATION_MODIFICATION_ALLOWED`` and ``CONFIGURATION_CREATION_ALLOWED``. They
must be used to explicitly activate the modification or creation of objects. By
default, the ``PersistentObjectConverter`` does only fetch objects from the persistence,
but does not create new ones or modifies existing ones.


Default Configuration
---------------------

If the Property Mapper is called without any ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``, the
``PropertyMappingConfigurationBuilder`` supplies a default configuration.

It allows *all changes* for the *top-level object*, but does not allow anything
for nested objects.

.. note:: In the MVC stack, the default ``PropertyMappingConfiguration`` is much more restrictive,
	not allowing any changes to any objects. See the next section for an in-depth
	explanation.

The Common Case: Fluid Forms
----------------------------

The Property Mapper is used to convert incoming values into objects inside the MVC stack.

Most commonly, these incoming values are created using HTML form elements inside
Fluid. That is why we want to make sure that only fields which are part of the
form are accepted for type conversion, and it should neither be possible to create
new objects nor to modify existing ones if that was not intended.

Because of that, the ``PropertyMappingConfiguration`` inside the MVC stack is
configured as restrictive as possible, not allowing any modifications of any
objects at all.

Furthermore, Fluid forms render an additional hidden form field containing a
secure list of all properties being transmitted; and this list is used to build
up the correct ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``.

As a result, it is not possible to manipulate the request on the client side,
but as long as Fluid forms are used, no extra work has to be done by the developer.

Reference of TypeConverters
===========================

.. note::

	This should be automatically generated from the source and will be
	added to the appendix if available.

The Inner Workings of the Property Mapper
=========================================

The Property Mapper applies the following steps to convert a simple type to an
object. Some of the steps will be described in detail afterwards.

#. Figure out which type converter to use for the given source - target pair.

#. Ask this type converter to return the child properties of the source data
   (if it has any), by calling ``getSourceChildPropertiesToBeConverted()`` on
   the type converter.

#. For each child property, do the following:

   #. Ask the type converter about the data type of the child property, by calling
      ``getTypeOfChildProperty()`` on the type converter.

   #. Recursively invoke the ``PropertyMapper`` to build the child object from the input data.

#. Now, call the type converter again (method ``convertFrom()``), passing all (already
   built) child objects along. The result of this call is returned as the final result of the
   property mapping process.

On first sight, the steps might seem complex and difficult, but they account for
a great deal of flexibility of the property mapper.
Automatic resolving of type converters

Automatic Resolving of Type Converters
--------------------------------------

All type converters which implement ``TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverterInterface``
are automatically found in the resolving process. There are four API methods in
each ``TypeConverter`` which influence the resolving process:

``getSupportedSourceTypes()``
  Returns an array of simple types which are understood as source type by this type
  converter.

``getSupportedTargetType()``
  The target type this type converter can convert into. Can be either a simple type,
  or a class name.

``getPriority()``
  If two type converters have the same source and target type, precedence
  is given to the one with higher priority. All standard TypeConverters
  have a priority lower than 100.

``canConvertFrom($source, $targetType)``
  Is called as last check, when source and target types fit together. Here, the
  TypeConverter can implement runtime constraints to decide whether it can do
  the conversion.

When a type converter has to be found, the following algorithm is applied:

1. If typeConverter is set in the ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``, this is directly used.

2. The inheritance hierarchy of the target type is traversed in reverse order (from
   most specific to generic) until a TypeConverter is found. If two type converters
   work on the same class, the one with highest priority is used.

3. If no type converter could be found for the direct inheritance hierarchy, it is
   checked if there is a TypeConverter for one of the interfaces the target class
   implements. As it is not possible in PHP to order interfaces in any meaningful
   way, the TypeConverter with the highest priority is used (throughout all interfaces).

4. If no type converter is found in the interfaces, it is checked if there is an
   applicable type converter for the target type ``object``.

If a type converter is found according to the above algorithm, ``canConvertFrom`` is
called on the type converter, so he can perform additional runtime checks. In case
the ``TypeConverter`` returns ``FALSE``, the search is continued at the position
where it left off in the above algorithm.

For simple target types, the steps 2 and 3 are omitted.

Writing Your Own TypeConverters
-------------------------------

Often, it is enough to subclass
``TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\AbstractTypeConverter``
instead of implementing ``TypeConverterInterface``.

Besides, good starting points for own type converters are the ``DateTimeConverter``
or the ``IntegerConverter``. If you write your own type converter, you should set
it to a priority greater than 100, to make sure it is used before the standard
converters by FLOW3.

TypeConverters should not contain any internal state, as they are re-used by the
property mapper, even recursively during the same run.

Of further importance is the exception and error semantics, so there are a few
possibilities what can be returned in ``convertFrom()``:

* For fatal errors which hint at some wrong configuration of the developer, throw
  an exception. This will show a stack trace in development context. Also for
  detected security breaches, exceptions should be thrown.

* If at run-time the type converter does not wish to participate in the results,
  ``NULL`` should be returned. For example, if a file upload is expected, but there
  was no file uploaded, returning ``NULL`` would be the appropriate way to handling
  this.

* If the error is recoverable, and the user should re-submit his data, return a
  ``TYPO3\FLOW3\Error\Error`` object (or a subclass thereof), containing information
  about the error. In this case, the property is not mapped at all (``NULL`` is
  returned, like above).

  If the Property Mapping occurs in the context of the MVC stack (as it will be the
  case in most cases), the error is detected and a forward is done to the last shown
  form. The end-user experiences the same flow as when MVC validation errors happen.

  This is the correct response for example if the file upload could not be processed
  because of wrong checksums, or because the disk on the server is full.

.. warning::

	Inside a type converter it is not allowed to use an (injected) instance
	of ``TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\PropertyMapper`` because it can lead to an
	infinite recursive invocation.

Commit message:

[FEATURE] Allow mapping of indexed property names with placeholder
For multi-valued property types (Doctrine\Common\Collections\Collection or
array) the property mapper uses indexes as property names. To match the
property mapping configuration for any index, the path syntax supports an
asterisk as a placeholder:

	$propertyMappingConfiguration
		->forProperty('items.*')
		->setTypeConverterOption(
			'TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\PersistentObjectConverter',
			\TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\PersistentObjectConverter::CONFIGURATION_CREATION_ALLOWED,
			TRUE
		);

This also works recursively, as in 'items.*.author'.

Change-Id: I2fa8802ed07d341d5e5bd79bfa5df05244679fe4
Resolves: #37436
Releases: 1.1, 1.2

Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartIII/PropertyMapping.rst, after:

================
Property Mapping
================

.. sectionauthor:: Sebastian Kurfürst <sebastian@typo3.org>

.. TODOs: extract TypeConverter reference from PHPDoc

The Property Mappers task is to convert *simple types*, like arrays, strings, numbers,
to objects. This is most prominently needed in the MVC framework: When a request
arrives, it contains all its data as simple types, that is strings, and arrays.

We want to help the developer thinking about *objects*, that's why we try to
transparently convert the incoming data to its correct object representation.
This is the objective of the *Property Mapper*.

At first, we show some examples on how the property mapper can be used, and then
the internal structure is explained.

The main API of the ``PropertyMapper`` is very simple: It just consists of one method
``convert($source, $targetType)``, which receives input data as the first argument,
and the target type as second argument. This method returns the built object of type
``$targetType``.

Example Usage
=============

The most simple usage is to convert simple types to different simple types, i.e.
converting a numeric ``string`` to a ``float`` number::

	// $propertyMapper is of class TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\PropertyMapper
	$result = $propertyMapper->convert('12.5', 'float');
	// $result == (float)12.5

This is of course a really conceived example, as the same result could be achieved
by just casting the numeric string to a floating point number.

Our next example goes a bit further and shows how we can use the Property Mapper
to convert an array of data into a domain model::

	/**
	 * @FLOW3\Entity
	 */
	class TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person {
		/**
		 * @var string
		 */
		protected $name;

		/**
		 * @var \DateTime
		 */
		protected $birthDate;

		/**
		 * @var TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person
		 */
		protected $mother;
		// ... furthermore contains getters and setters for the above properties.
	}

	$inputArray = array(
		'name' => 'John Fisher',
		'birthDate' => '1990-11-14T15:32:12+00:00'
	);
	$person = $propertyMapper->convert($inputArray, 'TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person');

	// $person is a newly created object of type TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person
	// $person->name == 'John Fisher'
	// $person->birthDate is a DateTime object with the correct date set.

We'll first use a simple input array::

	$input = array(
	  'name' => 'John Fisher',
	  'birthDate' => '1990-11-14T15:32:12+00:00'
	);

After calling ``$propertyMapper->convert($input, 'TYPO3\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person')``,
we receive an ew object of type ``Person`` which has ``$name`` set to ``John Fisher``,
and ``$birthDate`` set to a ``DateTime`` object of the specified date. You might
now wonder how the PropertyMapper knows how to convert ``DateTime`` objects and
``Person`` objects? The answer is: It does not know that. However, the PropertyMapper
calls specialized *Type Converters* which take care of the actual conversion.

In our example, three type converters are called:

* First, to convert 'John Fisher' to a string (required by the annotation in the
  domain model), a ``StringConverter`` is called. This converter simply passes
  through the input string, without modification.
* Then, a ``DateTimeConverter`` is called, whose responsibility is to convert the
  input string into a valid ``DateTime`` object.
* At the end, the ``Person`` object still needs to be built. For that, the
  ``PersistentObjectConverter`` is responsible. It creates a fresh ``Person`` object,
  and sets the ``$name`` and ``$birthDate`` properties which were already built
  using the type converters above.

This example should illustrate that property mapping is a recursive process, and
the PropertyMappers task is exactly to orchestrate the different ``TypeConverters``
needed to build a big, compound object.

The ``PersistentObjectConverter`` has some more features, as it supports fetching
objects from the persistence layer if an identity for the object is given. Both
the following inputs will result in the corresponding object to be fetched from
the persistence layer::

	$input = '14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66';
	// or:
	$input = array(
	  '__identity' => '14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66'
	);

	$person = $propertyMapper->convert($input, 'MyCompany\MyPackage\Domain\Model\Person');
	// The $person object with UUID 14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66 is fetched from the persistence layer

In case some more properties are specified in the array (besides ``__identity``),
the submitted properties are modified on the fetched object. These modifications are
not automatically saved to the database at the end of the request, you need to pass
such an instance to ``update`` on the corresponding repository to persist the changes.

So, let's walk through a more complete input example::

	$input = array(
	  '__identity' => '14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66',
	  'name' => 'John Doe',
	  'mother' => 'efd3b461-6f24-499d-97bc-309dfbe01f05'
	);

In this case, the following steps happen:

* The ``Person`` object with identity ``14d20100-9d70-11e0-aa82-0800200c9a66`` is
  fetched from persistence.
* The ``$name`` of the fetched ``$person`` object is updated to ``John Doe``
* As the ``$mother`` property is also of type ``Person``, the ``PersistentObjectConverter``
  is invoked recursively. It fetches the ``Person`` object with identifier
  ``efd3b461-6f24-499d-97bc-309dfbe01f05``, which is then set as the ``$mother``
  property of the original person.

Here, you see that we can also set associations using the Property Mapper.

Configuring the Conversion Process
==================================

It is possible to configure the conversion process by specifying a
``PropertyMappingConfiguration`` as third parameter to ``PropertyMapper::convert()``.
If no ``PropertyMappingConfiguration`` is specified, the ``PropertyMappingConfigurationBuilder``
automatically creates a default ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``.

In most cases, you should use the ``PropertyMappingConfigurationBuilder`` to create a new
PropertyMappingConfiguration, so that you get a convenient default configuration::

		// Here $propertyMappingConfigurationBuilder is an instance of
		// \TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\PropertyMappingConfigurationBuilder
	$propertyMappingConfiguration = $propertyMappingConfigurationBuilder->build();

		// modify $propertyMappingConfiguration here

		// pass the configuration to convert()
	$propertyMapper->convert($source, $targetType, $propertyMappingConfiguration);

The following configuration options exist:

* ``setMapping($sourcePropertyName, $targetPropertyName)`` can be used to rename properties.

  Example: If the input array contains a property ``lastName``, but the accordant
  property in the model is called ``$givenName``, the following configuration performs
  the renaming::

    $propertyMappingConfiguration->setMapping('lastName', 'givenName');

* ``setTypeConverter($typeConverter)`` can be used to directly set a type converter
  which should be used. This disables the automatic resolving of type converters.

* ``setTypeConverterOption($typeConverterClassName, $optionKey, $optionValue)``
  can be used to set type converter specific options.

  Example: The DateTimeConverter supports a configuration option for the expected
  date format::

	$propertyMappingConfiguration->setTypeConverterOption(
		'TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\DateTimeConverter',
		\TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\DateTimeConverter::CONFIGURATION_DATE_FORMAT,
		'Y-m-d'
	);

* ``setTypeConverterOptions($typeConverterClassName, array $options)`` can be used
  to set multiple configuration options for the given ``TypeConverter``. This overrides
  all previously set configuration options for the ``TypeConverter``.

* ``allowProperties($propertyName1, $propertyName2, ...)`` specifies the allowed
  property names which should be converted on the current level.

* ``allowAllProperties()`` allows *all* properties on the current level.

* ``allowAllPropertiesExcept($propertyName1, $propertyName2)`` effectively *inverts*
  the behavior: all properties on the current level are allowed, except the ones
  specified as arguments to this method.

All the configuration options work only for the current level, i.e. all of the
above converter options would only work for the top level type converter. However,
it is also possible to specify configuration options for lower levels, using
``forProperty($propertyPath)``. This is best shown with the example from the previous section.

The following configuration sets a mapping on the top level, and furthermore
configures the ``DateTime`` converter for the ``birthDate`` property::

	$propertyMappingConfiguration->setMapping('fullName', 'name');
	$propertyMappingConfiguration
		->forProperty('birthDate')
		->setTypeConverterOption(
			'TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\DateTimeConverter',
			\TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\DateTimeConverter::CONFIGURATION_DATE_FORMAT,
			'Y-m-d'
		);

``forProperty()`` also supports more than one nesting level using the dot notation,
so writing something like ``forProperty('mother.birthDate')`` is possible. For multi-valued
property types (``Doctrine\Common\Collections\Collection`` or ``array``) the property mapper
will use indexes as property names. To match the property mapping configuration for any index,
the path syntax supports an asterisk as a placeholder::

	$propertyMappingConfiguration
		->forProperty('items.*')
		->setTypeConverterOption(
			'TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\PersistentObjectConverter',
			\TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\PersistentObjectConverter::CONFIGURATION_CREATION_ALLOWED,
			TRUE
		);

.. admonition:: Property Mapping Configuration in the MVC stack

	The most common use-case where you will want to adjust the Property Mapping Configuration
	is inside the MVC stack, where incoming arguments are converted to objects.

	If you use Fluid forms, normally no adjustments are needed. However, when programming
	a web service or an ajax endpoint, you might need to set the ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``
	manually. You can access them using the ``\TYPO3\FLOW3\Mvc\Controller\Argument``
	object -- and this configuration takes place inside the corresponding ``initialize*Action``
	of the controller, as in the following example:

	.. code-block:: php

		public function initializeUpdateAction() {
			$commentConfiguration = $this->arguments['comment']->getPropertyMappingConfiguration();
			$commentConfiguration->allowAllProperties();
			$commentConfiguration
				->setTypeConverterOption(
				'TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\PersistentObjectConverter',
				\TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\PersistentObjectConverter::CONFIGURATION_CREATION_ALLOWED,
				TRUE
			);
		}

		/**
		 * @param \My\Package\Domain\Model\Comment $comment
		 */
		public function updateAction(\My\Package\Domain\Model\Comment $comment) {
			// use $comment object here
		}


Security Considerations
-----------------------

The property mapping process can be security-relevant, as a small example should
show: Suppose there is a REST API where a person can create a new account, and assign
a role to this account (from a pre-defined list). This role controls the access
permissions the user has. The data which is sent to the server might look like this::

	array(
	  'username' => 'mynewuser',
	  'role' => '5bc42c89-a418-457f-8095-062ace6d22fd'
	);

Here, the ``username`` field contains the name of the user, and the ``role`` field points
to the role the user has selected. Now, an attacker could modify the data, and submit the
following::

	array(
	  'username' => 'mynewuser',
	  'role' => array(
	    'name' => 'superuser',
	    'admin' => 1
	  )
	);

As the property mapper works recursively, it would create a new ``Role`` object with the
admin flag set to ``TRUE``, which might compromise the security in the system.

That's why two parts need to be configured for enabling the recursive behavior: First, you need
to specify the allowed properties using one of the ``allowProperties(), allowAllProperties()``
or ``allowAllPropertiesExcept()`` methods.

Second, you need to configure the the PersistentObjectConverter using the two options
``CONFIGURATION_MODIFICATION_ALLOWED`` and ``CONFIGURATION_CREATION_ALLOWED``. They
must be used to explicitly activate the modification or creation of objects. By
default, the ``PersistentObjectConverter`` does only fetch objects from the persistence,
but does not create new ones or modifies existing ones.


Default Configuration
---------------------

If the Property Mapper is called without any ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``, the
``PropertyMappingConfigurationBuilder`` supplies a default configuration.

It allows *all changes* for the *top-level object*, but does not allow anything
for nested objects.

.. note:: In the MVC stack, the default ``PropertyMappingConfiguration`` is much more restrictive,
	not allowing any changes to any objects. See the next section for an in-depth
	explanation.

The Common Case: Fluid Forms
----------------------------

The Property Mapper is used to convert incoming values into objects inside the MVC stack.

Most commonly, these incoming values are created using HTML form elements inside
Fluid. That is why we want to make sure that only fields which are part of the
form are accepted for type conversion, and it should neither be possible to create
new objects nor to modify existing ones if that was not intended.

Because of that, the ``PropertyMappingConfiguration`` inside the MVC stack is
configured as restrictive as possible, not allowing any modifications of any
objects at all.

Furthermore, Fluid forms render an additional hidden form field containing a
secure list of all properties being transmitted; and this list is used to build
up the correct ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``.

As a result, it is not possible to manipulate the request on the client side,
but as long as Fluid forms are used, no extra work has to be done by the developer.

Reference of TypeConverters
===========================

.. note::

	This should be automatically generated from the source and will be
	added to the appendix if available.

The Inner Workings of the Property Mapper
=========================================

The Property Mapper applies the following steps to convert a simple type to an
object. Some of the steps will be described in detail afterwards.

#. Figure out which type converter to use for the given source - target pair.

#. Ask this type converter to return the child properties of the source data
   (if it has any), by calling ``getSourceChildPropertiesToBeConverted()`` on
   the type converter.

#. For each child property, do the following:

   #. Ask the type converter about the data type of the child property, by calling
      ``getTypeOfChildProperty()`` on the type converter.

   #. Recursively invoke the ``PropertyMapper`` to build the child object from the input data.

#. Now, call the type converter again (method ``convertFrom()``), passing all (already
   built) child objects along. The result of this call is returned as the final result of the
   property mapping process.

On first sight, the steps might seem complex and difficult, but they account for
a great deal of flexibility of the property mapper.
Automatic resolving of type converters

Automatic Resolving of Type Converters
--------------------------------------

All type converters which implement ``TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverterInterface``
are automatically found in the resolving process. There are four API methods in
each ``TypeConverter`` which influence the resolving process:

``getSupportedSourceTypes()``
  Returns an array of simple types which are understood as source type by this type
  converter.

``getSupportedTargetType()``
  The target type this type converter can convert into. Can be either a simple type,
  or a class name.

``getPriority()``
  If two type converters have the same source and target type, precedence
  is given to the one with higher priority. All standard TypeConverters
  have a priority lower than 100.

``canConvertFrom($source, $targetType)``
  Is called as last check, when source and target types fit together. Here, the
  TypeConverter can implement runtime constraints to decide whether it can do
  the conversion.

When a type converter has to be found, the following algorithm is applied:

1. If typeConverter is set in the ``PropertyMappingConfiguration``, this is directly used.

2. The inheritance hierarchy of the target type is traversed in reverse order (from
   most specific to generic) until a TypeConverter is found. If two type converters
   work on the same class, the one with highest priority is used.

3. If no type converter could be found for the direct inheritance hierarchy, it is
   checked if there is a TypeConverter for one of the interfaces the target class
   implements. As it is not possible in PHP to order interfaces in any meaningful
   way, the TypeConverter with the highest priority is used (throughout all interfaces).

4. If no type converter is found in the interfaces, it is checked if there is an
   applicable type converter for the target type ``object``.

If a type converter is found according to the above algorithm, ``canConvertFrom`` is
called on the type converter, so he can perform additional runtime checks. In case
the ``TypeConverter`` returns ``FALSE``, the search is continued at the position
where it left off in the above algorithm.

For simple target types, the steps 2 and 3 are omitted.

Writing Your Own TypeConverters
-------------------------------

Often, it is enough to subclass
``TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\TypeConverter\AbstractTypeConverter``
instead of implementing ``TypeConverterInterface``.

Besides, good starting points for own type converters are the ``DateTimeConverter``
or the ``IntegerConverter``. If you write your own type converter, you should set
it to a priority greater than 100, to make sure it is used before the standard
converters by FLOW3.

TypeConverters should not contain any internal state, as they are re-used by the
property mapper, even recursively during the same run.

Of further importance is the exception and error semantics, so there are a few
possibilities what can be returned in ``convertFrom()``:

* For fatal errors which hint at some wrong configuration of the developer, throw
  an exception. This will show a stack trace in development context. Also for
  detected security breaches, exceptions should be thrown.

* If at run-time the type converter does not wish to participate in the results,
  ``NULL`` should be returned. For example, if a file upload is expected, but there
  was no file uploaded, returning ``NULL`` would be the appropriate way to handling
  this.

* If the error is recoverable, and the user should re-submit his data, return a
  ``TYPO3\FLOW3\Error\Error`` object (or a subclass thereof), containing information
  about the error. In this case, the property is not mapped at all (``NULL`` is
  returned, like above).

  If the Property Mapping occurs in the context of the MVC stack (as it will be the
  case in most cases), the error is detected and a forward is done to the last shown
  form. The end-user experiences the same flow as when MVC validation errors happen.

  This is the correct response for example if the file upload could not be processed
  because of wrong checksums, or because the disk on the server is full.

.. warning::

	Inside a type converter it is not allowed to use an (injected) instance
	of ``TYPO3\FLOW3\Property\PropertyMapper`` because it can lead to an
	infinite recursive invocation.
