Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartIII/SessionHandling.rst, before:

﻿================
Session Handling
================

TYPO3 Flow has excellent support for working with sessions.

This chapter will explain:

* ... how to store specific data in a session
* ... how to store objects in the session

Scope Session
=============

TYPO3 Flow does not only support the ``prototype`` and ``singleton`` object scopes, but also the
object scope ``session``. Objects marked like this basically behave like ``singleton`` objects
which are automatically serialized into the user's session.

As an example, when building a shopping basket, the class could look as follows::

	/**
	 * @Flow\Scope("session")
	 */
	class ShoppingBasket {

		/**
		 * @var array
		 */
		protected $items = array();

		/**
		 * @param string $item
		 * @return void
		 * @Flow\Session(autoStart = TRUE)
		 */
		public function addItem($item) {
			$this->items[] = $item;
		}

		/**
		 * @return array
		 */
		public function getItems() {
			return $this->items;
		}
	}

In the above example

* the object scope is set to ``session``, so it behaves like a *user-bound cross-request
  singleton*. This ``ShoppingBasket`` can now be injected where it is needed using *Dependency
  Injection*.
* We only want to start a session when the first element is added to the shopping basket.
  For this the addItem() method needs to be annotated with ``@Flow\Session(autoStart = TRUE)``.

When a user browses the website, the following then happens:

* First, the user's shopping basket is empty, and getItems() returns an empty array.
  No session exists yet. For each page being requested, the ``ShoppingBasket`` is
  newly initialized.

* As soon as the user adds something to the shopping basket, ``addItem()`` is called.
  Because this is annotated with ``@Flow\Session(autoStart = TRUE)``, a new PHP session
  is started, and the ShoppingBasket is placed into the session.

* As the user continues to browse the website, the ``ShoppingBasket`` is being fetched
  from the user's session (which exists now). Thus, ``getItems()`` returns the items
  from the session.


.. admonition:: Why is ``@Flow\Session(autoStart = TRUE)`` necessary?

	If TYPO3 Flow did not have this annotation, there would be no way for it to determine
	when a session must be started. Thus, every user browsing the website would
	*always* need a session as soon as an object of scope ``session`` is accessed.
	This would happens if the ``session``-scoped object is still in its initial state.

	To be able to use proxies such as Varnish, TYPO3 Flow defers the creation of a
	session to a point in time when it is really needed -- and the developer needs
	to tell the framework when that point is reached using the above annotation.


The TYPO3 Flow session scope handles persistent objects and dependency injection correctly:

* Objects which are injected via Dependency Injection are removed before serialization
  and re-injected on deserialization.

* Persistent objects which are unchanged are just stored as a reference and fetched
  from persistence again on deserialization.

* Persistent objects which are modified are fully stored in the session.

Low-level session handling
==========================

It is possible to inject the ``TYPO3\Flow\Session\SessionInterface`` and interact
with the PHP session on a low level, by using ``start()``, ``getData()`` and ``putData()``.

That should rarely be needed, though. Instead of manually serializing objects object into
the session, the *session scope* should be used whenever possible.

Flow Session
============

The session implementation written in plain PHP (FlowSession) uses the caching
framework as its storage. This allows for storing session data in a variety of
backends, including PDO databases, APC, Memcache and Redis.

In order to use FlowSession instead of PhpSession you need to select the
implementation through a custom Objects.yaml placed in one of your packages or the
global configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

	TYPO3\Flow\Session\SessionInterface:
	  className: TYPO3\Flow\Session\FlowSession

Likewise, the preferred storage backend for FlowSession is defined through a custom
Caches.yaml file, placed in a package or the global configuration:

.. code-block:: yaml

	Flow_Session_Storage:
	  backend: TYPO3\Flow\Cache\Backend\ApcBackend

The FlowSession implementation provides a few more configuration options, related to
the session cookie and the automatic garbage collection. Please refer to the
Settings.yaml file of the TYPO3 Flow package for a list of all possible options and
their respective documentation.

Commit message:

[!!!][FEATURE] Remote session management
This introduces the foundations for remote session management – that is,
inspection, modification and destruction of sessions which are not
currently active in the browser running the current HTTP request

This patch also REMOVES the PhpSession implementation and configures
the new, Flow-native implementation to be the default session handler.

If you provided specific configuration for session cookies through
TYPO3:Flow:Session:PhpSession:*, you will need to adjust your settings
to use options in TYPO3:Flow:Session:* instead.

This change set also contains a new type converter which is capable of
converting a session identifier to a session object.

Change-Id: Ia2fa37882f9997372a537d6a957bb8eafca40ca0
Resolves: #43376
Releases: 1.2

Documentation/TheDefinitiveGuide/PartIII/SessionHandling.rst, after:

﻿================
Session Handling
================

TYPO3 Flow has excellent support for working with sessions.

This chapter will explain:

* ... how to store specific data in a session
* ... how to store objects in the session

Scope Session
=============

TYPO3 Flow does not only support the ``prototype`` and ``singleton`` object scopes, but also the
object scope ``session``. Objects marked like this basically behave like ``singleton`` objects
which are automatically serialized into the user's session.

As an example, when building a shopping basket, the class could look as follows::

	/**
	 * @Flow\Scope("session")
	 */
	class ShoppingBasket {

		/**
		 * @var array
		 */
		protected $items = array();

		/**
		 * @param string $item
		 * @return void
		 * @Flow\Session(autoStart = TRUE)
		 */
		public function addItem($item) {
			$this->items[] = $item;
		}

		/**
		 * @return array
		 */
		public function getItems() {
			return $this->items;
		}
	}

In the above example

* the object scope is set to ``session``, so it behaves like a *user-bound cross-request
  singleton*. This ``ShoppingBasket`` can now be injected where it is needed using *Dependency
  Injection*.
* We only want to start a session when the first element is added to the shopping basket.
  For this the addItem() method needs to be annotated with ``@Flow\Session(autoStart = TRUE)``.

When a user browses the website, the following then happens:

* First, the user's shopping basket is empty, and getItems() returns an empty array.
  No session exists yet. For each page being requested, the ``ShoppingBasket`` is
  newly initialized.

* As soon as the user adds something to the shopping basket, ``addItem()`` is called.
  Because this is annotated with ``@Flow\Session(autoStart = TRUE)``, a new PHP session
  is started, and the ShoppingBasket is placed into the session.

* As the user continues to browse the website, the ``ShoppingBasket`` is being fetched
  from the user's session (which exists now). Thus, ``getItems()`` returns the items
  from the session.


.. admonition:: Why is ``@Flow\Session(autoStart = TRUE)`` necessary?

	If TYPO3 Flow did not have this annotation, there would be no way for it to determine
	when a session must be started. Thus, every user browsing the website would
	*always* need a session as soon as an object of scope ``session`` is accessed.
	This would happens if the ``session``-scoped object is still in its initial state.

	To be able to use proxies such as Varnish, TYPO3 Flow defers the creation of a
	session to a point in time when it is really needed -- and the developer needs
	to tell the framework when that point is reached using the above annotation.


The Flow session scope handles persistent objects and dependency injection correctly:

* Objects which are injected via Dependency Injection are removed before serialization
  and re-injected on deserialization.

* Persistent objects which are unchanged are just stored as a reference and fetched
  from persistence again on deserialization.

* Persistent objects which are modified are fully stored in the session.

Low-level session handling
==========================

It is possible to inject the ``TYPO3\Flow\Session\SessionInterface`` and interact
with the session on a low level, by using ``start()``, ``getData()`` and ``putData()``.

That should rarely be needed, though. Instead of manually serializing objects object into
the session, the *session scope* should be used whenever possible.

Session Backends
================

The session implementation of TYPO3 Flow is written in pure PHP and uses the caching
framework as its storage. This allows for storing session data in a variety of
backends, including PDO databases, APC, Memcache and Redis.

The preferred storage backend for the built-in session is defined through a custom
Caches.yaml file, placed in a package or the global configuration directory:

.. code-block:: yaml

	Flow_Session_Storage:
	  backend: TYPO3\Flow\Cache\Backend\ApcBackend

The built-in session implementation provides a few more configuration options, related to
the session cookie and the automatic garbage collection. Please refer to the
Settings.yaml file of the TYPO3 Flow package for a list of all possible options and
their respective documentation.
