Documentation/Index.rst, before:

FLOW3 Documentation
===================

.. note::

	This documentation is still incomplete and has rough edges – it's a beta version.
	While we're working on it, we'd already love to get your feedback! Please share
	your thoughts in the `FLOW3 mailing list <http://lists.typo3.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/typo3-project-5_0-general>`_
	or the #FLOW3 channel on irc.freenode.net

	Help is always greatly appreciated, read :ref:`ch-contributing` to find out how
	you can improve FLOW3.

.. tip:: You can also use the left and right arrow keys to jump to the previous or next chapter.

Quickstart
----------

Get a first overview and a working example within 15 minutes: :doc:`Quickstart
<Quickstart/Index>`

.. toctree::
	:hidden:

	Quickstart/Index

The Definitive Guide
--------------------

The Hitchhiker's Guide to FLOW3 and comprehensive almanac:

.. toctree::
	:maxdepth: 2

	TheDefinitiveGuide/Index

TYPO3 Publication Style Guide
-----------------------------

A style guide giving advice on how to write for the TYPO3 project.

.. toctree::
	:maxdepth: 2

	StyleGuide/Index

Commit message:

[!!!][TASK] Rename FLOW3 to TYPO3 Flow
Adjusts the code, comments, documentation as needed.

A code migration to adjust packages and schema migrations are added as
well.

Change-Id: If4060e56c1c15bab9e02f107409bf89be217848e
Related: #41466
Migration: TYPO3.FLOW3-201209251426
Releases: 1.2

Documentation/Index.rst, after:

TYPO3 Flow Documentation
========================

.. note::

	This documentation is still incomplete and has rough edges – it's a beta version.
	While we're working on it, we'd already love to get your feedback! Please share
	your thoughts in the `TYPO3 Flow mailing list <http://lists.typo3.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/flow3-general>`_
	or the #flow3 channel on irc.freenode.net

	Help is always greatly appreciated, read :ref:`ch-contributing` to find out how
	you can improve TYPO3 Flow.

.. tip:: You can also use the left and right arrow keys to jump to the previous or next chapter.

Quickstart
----------

Get a first overview and a working example within 15 minutes: :doc:`Quickstart
<Quickstart/Index>`

.. toctree::
	:hidden:

	Quickstart/Index

The Definitive Guide
--------------------

The Hitchhiker's Guide to TYPO3 Flow and comprehensive almanac:

.. toctree::
	:maxdepth: 2

	TheDefinitiveGuide/Index

TYPO3 Publication Style Guide
-----------------------------

A style guide giving advice on how to write for the TYPO3 project.

.. toctree::
	:maxdepth: 2

	StyleGuide/Index
